# Brave-New-World-CYOA
Choose-Your-Own-Adventure for Brave New World (project for English class)  

Below is the reflection I wrote to accompany the project and explain some of the choices I made. If you're reading this, it may or may not make sense if you haven't read the book first, as I wrote this for my English class where the teacher has read the book.  

  Brave New World, by Aldous Huxley, is one of the most interesting books I have ever read, and making a Choose Your Own Adventure game out of it was a very thrilling task. Often regarded as a precursor to 1984 in the science fiction/dystopian genre, the book takes place in the year A.F. 632 in the World State. Eugenics and sleep conditioning are the World State’s means of adhering to their motto: “Community, Identity, Stability” (Huxley 1). In exchange for these things, the people have forsaken love and individuality, and instead focus on self-serving pleasures like having sex without dating exclusively and taking soma, a pleasure-inducing drug with a high that gives the consumer “a holiday from the facts” (Huxley 244).  

  The book revolves around a group of main characters who all choose to break away from the status quo somehow: Bernard Marx, whose sizeable inferiority complex inspires his feelings of individuality; Helmholtz Watson, who feels that his intellectual capabilities are being wasted; Lenina Crowne, who mostly follows her conditioning but sometimes experiments by going out with just one person; and John, who grew up outside the civilization on land the World State thought was not “worth the expense of civilizing” (Huxley 164). However, because they broke away from the status quo, none of them got a happy ending, which inspired me to make a Choose Your Own Adventure game; no matter which choices the player makes in the game, their ending is always one of exile, isolation, or death.  
 
  The choice to have the player closely follow John’s story in the game the same way it progresses through the book was inspired by the fact that John is an outlier in the World State. He is the only character in the book who has seen what life is like outside of the dystopian society, and every choice he makes is informed by his experiences, values, and life, which are more akin to ours than those of the other characters. In that same vein, however, I want the player to use their life and their experiences to inform their choices, not John’s. This is why I don’t go into too much depth when talking about John’s background and the way he grew up; I want the player to think about what they would do based on their values rather than what John would do based on his.  
  
  The choice to not offer a “happy” ending (in this case, the one where the player is a fully-fledged member of the World State) is based on the way I see the ending of the book. The three main characters, John, Bernard, and Helmholtz, all question the World State’s policies on science, religion, love, and freedom for various reasons, and none of them get the “happy” ending. The endings I chose for the game were variations of Helmholtz’s ending and John’s ending (and the ending in which the player doesn’t go with Bernard to the World State in the first place).  
  
  Helmholtz, who wanted to write intellectual criticisms of the world and essays and poetry about his enjoyment of solitude (which is heavily discouraged within the World State), was forced into exile and decided to go to the Falkland Islands because he believed that, “one would write better if the climate were bad. If there were a lot of wind and storms, for example…” (Huxley 235) I used his ending because, throughout the game, the player can choose which of the World State’s social norms they conform to. Helmholtz wants to write more intellectual material about more taboo topics, but he still conforms to some of the social norms that those in the Alpha caste follow, like teaching the propaganda or not pursuing romantic relationships.  
  
  John wasn’t supposed to escape; he was supposed to go into exile with Helmholtz and Bernard (who wasn’t given a choice of island). However, he refused to be a part of the World Controller’s experiment and escaped civilization altogether. He went to live in an abandoned lighthouse, where he planned to live in isolation. Feeling extreme amounts of guilt over his actions through the book like loving Lenina or not putting up a fight when his mother died, he hurt and punished himself in order to purify himself. Reporters very quickly found and filmed him; the chaos started after the footage was released because, “In a few minutes there were dozens of [people], standing in a wide circle round the lighthouse, staring, laughing, clicking their cameras, throwing (as to an ape) peanuts, packets of sex-hormone chewing-gum, pan-glandular petits beurres” (Huxley 262). Amidst the madness, John brutally attacked Lenina and took soma. In the wake of his actions, he hanged himself.  
  
  The way John’s story ended was what originally inspired me to make this game since his ending wasn’t happy either. None of the main characters got a happy ending, and no matter what choices they could have made throughout the novel, I don’t think they would have gotten one. The World Controller wanted to exile them because he knew the three of them were all rebellious in nature. Even if John had made all the right choices, he still would have held his ideas of individuality, freedom, and love, and the World Controller would have still considered him a risk to society. Just like how Bernard’s boss arranged for him to be exiled before Bernard had a chance to correct his actions, I think the World Controller would have exiled them no matter what else happened. This mirrors 1984 in a way, since, in both books, the governments win and the rebellious protagonists suffer.  
  
  One last choice I want to explain was what happens after the player chooses whether or not to try and free the Deltas. If the player chooses “Yes,” they are then able to escape if they want to. However, if the player chooses “No,” their only option is to go into exile. I think this choice is one of the most critical in the book. When John chooses to throw away the Deltas’ soma, that is his stand against the World State and its social order. I think it is at this point that he realizes he doesn’t want to live there, and that he wouldn’t go along with anyone else’s wishes anymore. When the player in the game chooses not to take this stand, I think it represents some kind of acceptance of the World State’s social hierarchy and, for that reason, they have to accept their exile as well. 
